CICS 109 Intro to Data Analysis in R
INSTRUCTOR(S): Jasper McChesney
An introduction to data analysis in the open-source R language, with an emphasis on practical data work. Topics will include data
wrangling, summary statistics, modeling, and visualization. Will also cover fundamental programming concepts including data types,
functions, flow of control, and good programming practices. Intended for a broad range of students outside of computer science.
Some familiarity with statistics is expected. 1 credit.
CICS 110 Foundations of Programming
INSTRUCTOR(S): Kirat Arora, Evan Ciccarelli, Dung Viet Pham, Cole Reilly, Bryn Reimer, Ella Tuson
An introduction to computer programming and problem solving using computers. This course teaches you how real-world problems
can be solved computationally using programming constructs and data abstractions of a modern programming language. Concepts
and techniques covered include variables, expressions, data types, objects, branching, iteration, functions, classes, and methods.
We will also cover how to translate problems into a sequence of instructions, investigate the fundamental operation of a
computational system and trace program execution and memory, and learn how to test and debug programs. No previous
programming experience required. (Gen. Ed. R2) Prerequisite: R1 (or a score of 15 or higher on the math placement test Part A), or
one of the following courses: MATH 101&102 or MATH 104 or MATH 127 or MATH 128 or MATH 131 or MATH 132. 4 credits.
CICS 127 Intro to Public Interest Tech
INSTRUCTOR(S): Emily Nutwell
Today's world is complex and tech driven. How do we use the tools of information technology to solve problems in a socially
responsible way, i.e., in a way that both empowers us and promotes the well-being of the communities in which we live? In this
course, we describe the socio-technical world and pragmatic strategies for promoting personal and social responsibility. We explore
the questions: What is the public interest in a socio-technical world? What strategies can we use to promote social responsibility in
the public sector, private sector, and general public? What can each of us do to make the world a better place? This course is for
everyone at all levels and with all interests. No programming or prerequisites are required. We focus on building skills to think
analytically, broadly, and strategically, as well as to communicate effectively about complex problems with societal impact.
Assignments will provide students multiple paths to success. Counts towards the IT minor and is required for the PIT Undergraduate
Certificate. (Gen. Ed. SI) 4 credits.
CICS 160 Object-Oriented Programming
INSTRUCTOR(S): Neha Kennard, Cole Reilly, Ella Tuson
This course will expose students to programming practices beyond the introductory level, concentrating on Object Oriented
Programming techniques and an introduction to Data Structures. Students will also study and analyze the complexity of both the
algorithms presented in class and of the algorithms they develop. This course also provides experience with the development and
analysis of recursive algorithms and programs. Before taking this course, students are expected to have been exposed to the
following concepts through a college-level course or equivalent in some high level computer programming language: input and
output operations, conditional statements, loops, arrays, recursion, and functions/methods. The course places an emphasis on the
careful design and testing of programs. (Gen. Ed. R2) Prerequisite: CICS 110 (previously INFO 190S) or COMPSCI 121 with a grade
of C or better. 4 credits.
CICS 210 Data Structures
INSTRUCTOR(S): Mordecai Golin, Marc Liberatore
An introduction to the design, analysis, and implementation of data structures. This course teaches you how to build, test, debug,
document, and evaluate objects that encapsulate data and their associated operations using programming constructs and data
abstractions of a modern programming language. Concepts and techniques covered include linear and non-linear structures,
recursive structures and algorithms, traversal algorithms, binary search trees, balanced trees, priority queues, union-find, hash
tables, bloom filters, and graphs. We will also informally compare and contrast the run time efficiency of algorithms and their
performance characteristics including the concept of worst-case running time analysis and the classification of algorithms in terms of
constant,logarithmic,linear,loglinear,quadratic,andexponentialtimeusingBig-Onotation. (Gen.Ed.R2) Prerequisite:CICS160
(previously INFO 190T) with a grade of C or better. 4 credits.
CICS 256 Make: Physical Computing
INSTRUCTOR(S): Donghyun Kim
Inspired by the Maker movement, this course provides a hands-on introduction to physical computing: sensing and responding to
the physical world using computers. Specific topics include: basic electronics and circuit design, microcontroller programming using
Arduinos, sensing and responding to the physical world, rapid prototyping (3D printing and laser cutting etc.), soft circuits and
wearable electronics. The course will encourage and empower students to invent, design, and build practical hardware projects that
interact with the physical world. This course has a required lab section, and counts as one of the CS Lab Science Requirement
courses for the BS-CS. Prerequisite: CICS 210 (or COMPSCI 187) with a grade of C or better and completion of the R1 (Basic Math
Skills) Gen. Ed. 4 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 1 --- 1/15/2026

CICS 291C S-Find Strengths/Design Career
INSTRUCTOR(S): Casey Maloney
This course is designed to prepare CICS students for their internship and job searches, improve their professional skills (both
technical and soft) and help them approach professional development and/or advanced educational opportunities with confidence. 1
credit.
CICS 291T S-CICS Transfer Success
INSTRUCTOR(S): Casey Maloney
This seminar is intended to help you become fully prepared to succeed in CICS at UMass. Students in this seminar will be led by an
instructor with a detailed understanding of the transfer student experience, and supported by various staff members in CICS. You
will learn about which campus and College resources will be most helpful to you, how to best utilize these resources, and where you
can look for other opportunities to connect. 1 credit.
CICS 305 Social Issues in Computing
INSTRUCTOR(S): Erin Butler, Siobhan Meï, Justin Obara, Christina Sutcliffe
This class satisfies the Junior Year Writing requirement by providing instruction in several different technical communication genres,
including research writing and science writing. Writing contexts will include writing for municipal, public, and professional audiences.
Through our writing, we will engage with computing topics and challenges facing our current global context and explore various
impacts of computers on modern society. Students will produce approximately 20-25 pages of polished written work over the course
ofthesemester. CICSPrimaryMajorsonly. Prerequisite:CSMajors: ENGLWRIT112withagradeofCorbetter(orEnglishWriting
waiver), COMPSCI 220, COMPSCI 230 and COMPSCI 240 (or 250); INFORM Majors: ENGLWRIT 112 with a grade of C or better (or
English Writing waiver) and INFO 248. 3 credits.
CICS 590P TechPolicy & Innov/Common Good
INSTRUCTOR(S): Emily Nutwell, Carolina Rossini
In this course, we will introduce Public Interest Technology, innovation, and relevant regulatory frameworks to provide a foundation
toexplore thethoughtful design oftechnology thatcan serve society while remaining safe for allusers andstakeholders. Thecourse
begins with examining the core values of public interest technology, such as fairness, transparency, accountability, and inclusivity.
We will then review foundational concepts around innovation and strategies, along with an overview of technology governance. An
overview ofproduct development models, focusing onAgileproduct development willbepresented along withapresentation oftech
governance within an Agile framework. We will then analyze case studies where technologies have either succeeded or failed to
uphold these values, examining the societal impact of emerging technologies like artificial intelligence (AI), self-driving cars, digital
platforms, and data-driven systems. Throughout the semester, guest lectures from leaders in the fields of technology policy,
innovation, and governance will offer insights into how you can bridge the gap between regulatory goals and technological creativity
inyourfuturecareers.ThiscoursecountsasanElectivefortheCSandINFORMMajors. Cross-listedwithSPP590P. Undergraduate
Prerequisite: CICS 305 with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 119 Intro to Programming
INSTRUCTOR(S): Aline Weber
A complete introduction to computer programming using the Python language. Topics include coverage of all the supported data
types and program code structures, functions (up through lambda expressions and recursion), reasoning about and debugging
existing code, implementation of custom libraries, selection of data structures, and the fundamentals of object-oriented
programming. Students will create, debug, and run Python 3 programs that explore each of these topics in turn, from simple loops
up through the processing of large data sets, and eventually to the creation of professional-quality libraries to synthesize graphics
images and audio files. No prior programming experience expected. Not open to Computer Science majors. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 198C P-Intro/C Programming Language
INSTRUCTOR(S): Meng-Chieh Chiu, Timothy Richards
This practicum assumes general background and experience in computer programming (such as that provided by COMPSCI 121 or a
similar introductory programming course) and some knowledge of data structures. Content will include basic C data types,
declarations, expressions, statements, and functions; simple use of macros; some common library calls (such as formatted
input/output); basic pointer manipulation using linked lists; and introduction to using standard tools (gcc and make). A required
prerequisite for COMPSCI 230, effective Fall 2023. Prerequisite: CICS 160 (previously INFO 190T or COMPSCI 186 or CICS 210)
with a grade of C or better, or COMPSCI 121 with a grade of B or better. 1 credit.
COMPSCI 220 Programming Methodology
INSTRUCTOR(S): Marius Minea, James Perretta
Development of individual skills necessary for designing, implementing, testing and modifying larger programs, including: design
strategies and patterns, using functional and object-oriented approaches, testing and program verification, code refactoring,
interfacing with libraries. There will be significant programming and mid-term and final examinations. Prerequisite: CICS 210 (or
COMPSCI 187) with a grade of C or better. 4 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 2 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 230 Computer Systems Principles
INSTRUCTOR(S): Phuthipong Bovornkeeratiroj, Meng-Chieh Chiu
Large-scale software systems like Google - deployed over a world-wide network of hundreds of thousands of computers - have
become a part of our lives. These are systems success stories - they are reliable, available ("up" nearly all the time), handle an
unbelievable amount of load from users around the world, yet provide virtually instantaneous results. On the other hand, many
computer systems don't perform nearly as well as Google - hence the now-cliché "the system is down." In this class, we study the
scientific principles behind the construction of high-performance, scalable systems. The course begins with a discussion of C data
representation, and moves up the stack from there to the features of modern architectures, assembly languages, and operating
system services such as I/O, process, and synchronization. This class assumes students have either taken COMPSCI 198C or have
equivalent experience in the C programming language. Prerequisite: CICS 210 (or COMPSCI 187) with a grade of C or better and
COMPSCI 198C. 4 credits.
COMPSCI 240 Reasoning Under Uncertainty
INSTRUCTOR(S): Justin Domke, Ghazaleh Parvini
Development of mathematical reasoning skills for problems that involve uncertainty. Each concept will be illustrated by real-world
examples and demonstrated through in-class and homework exercises. Counting and probability -- basic counting problems,
probability definitions, mean, variance, binomial distribution, discrete random variables, continuous random variables, Markov and
Chebyshev bounds, Laws of large numbers, and central limit theorem. Probabilistic reasoning -- conditional probability and odds,
Bayes' Law, Markov Chains, Bayesian Networks. Statistical topics such as estimation of parameters and linear regression, as time
permits. Prerequisite: CICS 160 (previously INFO 190T or COMPSCI 187) or CICS 210 and MATH 132, all with a grade of C or
better. 4 credits.
COMPSCI 250 Introduction To Computation
INSTRUCTOR(S): David Barrington, Mordecai Golin
Basic concepts of discrete mathematics useful to computer science: set theory, strings and formal languages, propositional and
predicatecalculus,relationsandfunctions,basicnumbertheory. Inductionandrecursion: interplayofinductivedefinition,inductive
proof, and recursive algorithms. Graphs, trees, and search. Finite-state machines, regular languages, nondeterministic finite
automata, Kleene's Theorem. Problem sets, 2 midterm exams, timed final. Prerequisite: CICS 160 (previously INFO 190T or
COMPSCI 187 or E&C-ENG 241, or CICS 210) and MATH 132, all with a grade of C or better. 4 credits.
COMPSCI 311 Introduction to Algorithms
INSTRUCTOR(S): Ghazaleh Parvini, Cooper Sigrist
This course will introduce you to a variety of techniques to design algorithms, such as divide and conquer, greedy, dynamic
programming, and network flow. You will learn to study the performance of various algorithms within a formal, mathematical
framework. You will also learn how to design very efficient algorithms for many kinds of problems and recognize problems that
currently do not have efficient algorithms (You will learn about NP-Completeness). There is no programming assignment but
you shouldknowaprogramminglanguagetounderstandthealgorithms . Mathematicalexperience(asprovidedbyCOMPSCI250)is
required. This course is required for the CS Major (BS) and counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major (BA). Prerequisite: CICS 210
(OR COMPSCI 187) , and either COMPSCI 250 or MATH 455, all with a grade of C or better. 4 credits
COMPSCI 320 Software Engineering
INSTRUCTOR(S): Jaime Davila, James Perretta
In this course, students learn and gain practical experience with software engineering principles and techniques. The practical
experience centers on a semester-long team project in which a software development project is carried through all the stages of the
software life cycle. Topics in this course include requirements analysis, specification, design, abstraction, programming style,
testing, maintenance, communication, teamwork, and software project management. Particular emphasis is placed on
communication and negotiation skills and on designing and developing maintainable software. Use of computer required. Several
written assignments, in-class presentations, and a term project. This course satisfies the IE Requirement and counts as a CS
Elective for the CS Major. Prerequisite: COMPSCI 220 with a grade of C or better. 4 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 3 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 325 Intro/Human-Comp Interaction
INSTRUCTOR(S): Ella Tuson
Human-Computer Interaction design is "design for human use". Computers are a ubiquitous part of many interactions in our lives,
from the mundane everydayness of light switches and "smart" vending machines to entertainment and education to sophisticated
instruments and complex energy and defense systems. In this course, we will challenge you to broaden your grasp of what a user
interface can and should be, and try your hand at doing better yourself. It is a fast-paced, hands-on, project-based experience that
willchallengemanyofyourideasofwhatcomputerscienceisandcanbe.Itisdesignedaroundactivelecturesessionssupportedby
readings, working classes, and team projects, where students practice and explore the concepts introduced in lecture, and go well
beyond them to learn and apply HCI techniques that build into group projects. More specifically, the course adopts a human-
centered design (HCD) approach and teaches a highly iterative process called design thinking. The design thinking process draws
heavily on the fundamentals of human-computer interaction (HCI) methods. I also cover design methodologies, evaluation
methodologies (both quantitative and qualitative), human information processing, cognition, and perception. This course counts as
a CS Elective toward the CS Major and as a Required Core for the INFORM Major. Open to juniors and seniors in Computer Science
orInformatics. Prerequisite: Prerequisites:COMPSCI187(orCICS210)withagradeofCorbetterORINFO248andCOMPSCI186
(or 187 or CICS 160;INFO 190T) with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 326 Web Programming
INSTRUCTOR(S): Meng-Chieh Chiu, Timothy Richards
The web is arguably today's most important application platform. Web browsers run on practically every device, and even many
phone applications are in fact web applications under the covers. This course will cover a broad range of client-side web
technologies, including HTTP itself, HTML5, CSS, and JavaScript; it will additionally cover key concepts for the server side of web
applications, including key value stores and SQL servers. This course will also cover key concepts and technologies including AJAX,
JavaScript libraries (e.g., jQuery), and web security. This course is hands-on and heavily project-based; students will construct a
substantial dynamic web application based on the concepts, technologies, and techniques presented during lectures and in readings.
This course satisfies the IE Requirement and an Elective for both the CS and INFORM Majors. Note: as the name ‘web programming’
denotes, programming is a key component of this class. Previous background in JavaScript is strongly recommended. Prerequisite:
CSMajors: COMPSCI220withagradeofCorbetter;INFORMMajors:INFO248andCICS210,bothwithagradeofCorbetter. 4
credits.
COMPSCI 345 Pract & Appl of Data Managemnt
INSTRUCTOR(S): Gordon Anderson, Jaime Davila, Neha Makhija
Computinghasbecomedata-driven, anddatabasesarenowattheheartofcommercial applications. Thepurposeofthiscourseisto
provide a comprehensive introduction to the use of data management systems within the context of various applications. The
emphasis is on relational databases, though non-relational databases are also introduced. Some of the covered topics include the
relational data model, data retrieval, application-driven database design, schema refinement, implementation of basic transactions,
databasesecurity.ThiscoursecountsasaCSElectivefortheCSMajor.StudentswhohavecompletedCOMPSCI445arenoteligible
totakethiscoursewithoutinstructorpermission.Prerequisite:CSMAJORS:CICS210(orCOMPSCI187)withagradeofCorbetter.
INFORM MAJORS: INFO 248 and CICS 160 (previously INFO 190T or COMPSCI
186 or COMPSCI 187), all with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 348 Principles of Data Science
INSTRUCTOR(S): Matthew Rattigan
Data science uses various concepts, practices, algorithms, and systems to extract knowledge and insights from data. It
encompasses techniques from machine learning, statistics, databases, visualization, and several other fields. When properly
integrated, these techniques can help human analysts make sense of vast stores of digital information. This course presents the
fundamental principles of data science, familiarizes students with the technical details of representative algorithms, and connects
these concepts to applications in industry, science, and government, including fraud detection, marketing, scientific discovery, and
web mining. The course assumes that students are familiar with basic concepts and algorithms from probability and statistics. This
course counts as a CS Elective toward the CS Major. Prerequisites: CICS 210 (or COMPSCI 187), COMPSCI 240, and COMPSCI 250
(or MATH 455). 3 credits.
COMPSCI 360 Intro Computr & Ntwrk Security
INSTRUCTOR(S): Eugene Bagdasarian
This course provides an introduction to the principles and practice of computer, network, and artificial intelligence security. We will
focus on both fundamentals and practical information. Two key topics of this course are communication privacy and security on the
web, mobile, and AI. Subtopics include ciphers, hashes, key exchange, security services (integrity, availability, confidentiality, etc.),
mobile and web security, prompt injections and jailbreaking, and countermeasures. This course counts as a CS Elective for the CS
Major. Prerequisite: COMPSCI 230 with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 4 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 377 Operating Systems
INSTRUCTOR(S): Phuthipong Bovornkeeratiroj
In this course we examine the important problems in operating system design and implementation. The operating system provides
a well-known, convenient, and efficient interface between user programs and the bare hardware of the computer on which they run.
The operating system is responsible for allowing resources (e.g., disks, networks, and processors) to be shared, providing common
services needed by many different programs (e.g., file service, the ability to start or stop processes, and access to the printer), and
protecting individual programs from one another. The course will start with a brief historical perspective of the evolution of
operating systems over the last fifty years, and then cover the major components of most operating systems. This discussion will
cover the tradeoffs that can be made between performance and functionality during the design and implementation of an operating
system. Particular emphasis will be given to three major OS subsystems: process management (processes, threads, CPU
scheduling, synchronization, and deadlock), memory management (segmentation, paging, swapping), file systems, and operating
system support for distributed systems. Programming projects in C. This course counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major.
Prerequisite: COMPSCI 230 with a grade of C or better. 4 credits.
COMPSCI 383 Artificial Intelligence
INSTRUCTOR(S): Matthew Rattigan
ThiscourseaimstogivestudentsahighlevelunderstandingoftheprominentAItopicsthatarebeingemployedinindustrytoday.It
will provide an introduction to each topic, an overview of its supporting algorithms, and examples of products powered by the
technology. Particular emphasis will be had on Machine Learning and developing hands-on practical skills with this technology. Upon
completion of this course, students will obtain a wider scope of understanding about modern AI trends in software technology and
develop an intuition for how this software works. To succeed in this course, students will need a fundamental understanding of data
structures and programming fundamentals. Graph and tree data structures will be used in particular. Programming assignments in
this class will be done using Python. Experience in at least one programming language is required and it’s strongly recommended
youhavesomePythonexperience beforestarting.Amathematical foundation instatisticsandlinearalgebraisnotstrictlynecessary
but will deepen understanding of course material. This course counts as an Elective for CS and INFORM Majors. Prerequisite: CS
MAJORS: (CICS 210 or COMPSCI 187) and COMPSCI 240 (or STATISTC 315), both with a grade of C or better; INFORM MAJORS:
INFO 348 and STATISTC 315, both with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 389 Intro to Machine Learning
INSTRUCTOR(S): Philip Thomas
The course provides an introduction to machine learning algorithms and applications, and is intended for students with no prior
experience with machine learning. Students with prior experience in machine learning or who are already passionate about the
subject are encouraged to take COMPSCI 589 instead. Machine learning algorithms answer the question: "How can a computer
improve its performance based on data and from its own experience?" The course is roughly divided into thirds: supervised learning
(learning from labeled data), reinforcement learning (learning via trial and error), and real-world considerations like ethics, safety,
and fairness. Specific topics include linear and non-linear regression, (stochastic) gradient descent, neural networks,
backpropagation, classification, Markov decision processes, state-value and action-value functions, temporal difference learning,
actor-critic algorithms, the reward prediction error hypothesis for dopamine, connectionism for philosophy of mind, and ethics,
safety, andfairness considerations when applying machine learning toreal-world problems. This course counts as anElective for the
CS and INFORM Majors. Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in CICS 210 and COMPSCI 240 (or STATISTC 315 or STATISTC 240 or
PSYCH 240 or OIM 240 or RES-ECON 212 or SOCIOL 212), and MATH 132. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 390B HarnessingDataSci/SocietalGood
INSTRUCTOR(S): Abhidip Bhattacharyya
This is a project-based course in which students will explore using large-scale datasets and data analysis to address real-world
societal problems in domains such as sustainability, health, and work with different techniques of data analysis and processing.
Students will address problems of societal or industrial relevance. Each semester, the course will offer one or more real-world
datasets and a selection of sample problems and students will define a project based on these datasets to address a real-word
problem in a group setting. Students will collaborate in groups for their project. Students will explore modern data processing tools
andsoftwaresystemstobuilddataprocessingpipelinesfortheirchosenproject.Throughoutthecourse,studentswillbeexpectedto
present their project ideas, develop project proposals outlining their implementation plans, and conclude with a final presentation
and report submission. This course provides students with the opportunity to integrate their analytical and collaborative skills for
real-world problem-solving. This course counts as an Elective for the CS and INFORM Majors. Prerequisites: a grade of C or better
in CICS 210 and COMPSCI 220 (or 230 or INFO 248), and either COMPSCI 240, STATISTC 240, PSYCH 240, OIM 240, RES-ECON
212, SOCIOL 212, or STATISTC 315
COMPSCI 420 Software Entrepreneurship
INSTRUCTOR(S): Neena Thota
This course is geared towards students interested in developing software that moves from early stage proof-of-concept ideas
towardsmarketableproductswithsocietalbenefit.ThecourseleveragestheexpertiseoftheEntrepreneursinResidence(EIR)ofthe
Ventures @ CICS initiative at CICS. The course is grounded in Challenge Based Learning (CBL), an active, student-directed
instructional framework that was developed by Apple Inc. and educators. This course counts as a Elective for the CS and INFORM
Majors. Prerequisite: COMPSCi 320 (or COMPSCI 326) with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 5 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 426 Scalable Web Systems
INSTRUCTOR(S): Timothy Richards
The web has become a large and complex area for application development. Access to an abundance of open source languages,
libraries,andframeworkshasledtothequickandeasyconstructionofavarietyofapplicationswithseveralmovingpartsworkingin
coordination to present to the user the illusion of a single program. In reality, web applications are extremely difficult to get right.
They involve a large collection of coordinated services, multiple databases, complicated user interfaces, security and performance
issues, and ever changing 3rd party services, spread across physical and virtual machines. These complications are further stressed
bythelarge number ofconcurrent users thataccess these applications every second. This course willinvestigate several well known
web-based applications and the technology and software architecture used to scale these applications. We will also study a specific
topic related to scalability in software design in the context of web application architecture. This course counts as an Elective for the
CS and INFORM Majors. Prerequisite: COMPSCI 320 or COMPSCI 326 with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 429 Software Engin Proj Management
INSTRUCTOR(S): Jaime Davila, James Perretta
The purpose of this course is to provide students with practical experience in the management of software development projects.
Students in this course will gain this experience by serving as software development team technical managers for teams of software
engineering students in COMPSCI 320. As project managers, the students in COMPSCI 429 will be responsible for: supervising and
managing the work of teams of COMPSCI 320 students; interfacing with the other COMPSCI 429 students managing other teams in
thecourse;interfacingwiththecourseinstructor,courseTA,andcoursecustomer. COMPSCI429studentswillbeassignedreadings
in software engineering project management to provide a theoretical basis for their work in this course. But the majority of work in
the course will be related to the actual management of assigned development teams. As team managers, COMPSCI 429 students
will set goals and schedules for their teams, track and report team progress, negotiate with leaders of other teams and the course
customer, and evaluate the work of members of their teams. COMPSCI 429 course assignments may include: written team goals,
plans and schedules; periodic reports on team progress; documentation of agreements reached with other team leaders and
customers; evaluations of the applicability of theoretical papers to the work of this course. This course will meet at the same times
and places as COMPSCI 320. Additional meetings with team members and other students in COMPSCI 429 are also expected to be
arranged by mutual agreement. An additional one hour weekly meeting of all of the students in COMPSCI 429 is required. This
coursecountsasaCSElectivefortheCSMajor. Enrollmentinthiscourseisonlybypermissionoftheinstructor,andisrestrictedto
students who have previously taken COMPSCI 320, and received a grade of B or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 445 Information Systems
INSTRUCTOR(S): Trek Palmer
This course is an introduction to the efficient management of large-scale data. The course includes principles for representing
information as structured data, query languages for analyzing and manipulating structured data, and core systems principles that
enable efficient computation on large data sets. Classical relational database topics will be covered (data modeling, SQL, query
optimization, concurrency control), as well as semi-structured data (XML, JSON), and distributed data processing paradigms (e.g.
MapReduce and Spark). Additional application topics may include web application development, data integration, processing data
streams,databasesecurityandprivacy.ThiscoursecountsasanElectivetowardtheCSMajor. Prerequisite:COMPSCI220(or230)
and COMPSCI 311 and COMPSCI 345 with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 446 Search Engines
INSTRUCTOR(S): Razieh Rahimi
This course provides an overview of the important issues in information retrieval, and how those issues affect the design and
implementation of search engines. The course emphasizes the technology used in Web search engines, and the information retrieval
theories and concepts that underlie all search applications. Mathematical experience (as provided by COMPSCI 240) is required. You
should also be able to program in Java or Python (other closely related languages may be acceptable). This course counts as a CS
Elective for the CS Major. Prerequisite: COMPSCI 240 or COMPSCI 383 with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 453 Computer Networks
INSTRUCTOR(S): Arun Venkataramani
This course provides an introduction to fundamental concepts in the design and implementation of computer networks, their
protocols,andapplicationswithaparticularemphasisontheInternet'sTCP/IPprotocolsuite.Topicstobecoveredinclude:overview
of network architectures, applications, network programming interfaces (e.g., sockets), transport, congestion, routing, and data link
protocols, addressing, local area networks, wireless networks, network security, and network management. There will be five or six
homeworks, two programming projects, several hands-on labs (that require an Internet-connected personal computer) and two
exams. This course counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major. Prerequisite: Experience programming; COMPSCI 230 (or COMPSCI
377) with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 6 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 466 Applied Cryptography
INSTRUCTOR(S): Adam O'Neill
This is an undergraduate-level introduction to cryptography. It is a theory course with a significant mathematical component.
However, our viewpoint will be “theory applied to practice” in that we will aim to treat topics in a way of applied value. We will
discuss cryptographic algorithms used in practice and how to reason about their security. More fundamentally, we will try to
understand what security “is” in a rigorous way that allows us to follow sound principles and uncover design weaknesses. The
primary topics are: blockciphers, pseudorandom functions, symmetric-key encryption schemes, hash functions, message
authentication codes, public-key encryption schemes, digital signature schemes, and public-key infrastructures. This course counts
as a CS Elective toward the CS Major. Prerequisite: COMPSCI 311 with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 485 Applications of NLP
INSTRUCTOR(S): Katrin Erk
This course will introduce NLP methods and applications, such as text classification, sentiment analysis, machine translation, and
other applications to identify and use the meaning of text. During the course, students will (1) learn fundamental methods and
algorithms for NLP;(2)become familiar withkey facts about human language thatmotivate them, andhelppractitioners know what
problems are possible to solve; and (3) complete a series of hands-on projects to use, implement, experiment with, and improve
NLPtools. ThiscoursecountsasaCSElectivefortheCSMajor. Prerequisite: COMPSCI220andCOMPSCI240withagradeofCor
better, or LINGUIST 429B (previously LINGUIST 492B) with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 491G S-Computer Networking Lab
INSTRUCTOR(S): Parviz Kermani
In this course, students will learn how to put "principles into practice," in a hands-on-networking lab course. The course will cover
router,switchesandend-systemlabsintheareasofSingleSegmentIPNetworks,MultipleSegmentIPNetworksandStaticRouting,
Dynamic Routing Protocols (RIP, OSPF and BGP), LAN switching, Transport Layer Protocols: UDP and TCP, NAT, DHCP, DNS, and
SNMP. Students will also get engaged in evaluating power consumption of network components as an aid in the design of energy
efficient (green) networks. This course counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major. Prerequisite: COMPSCI 453 with a grade of C or
better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 501 Formal Language Theory
INSTRUCTOR(S): David Barrington
Introduction to formal language theory. Topics include finite state languages, context-free languages, the relationship between
language classes and formal machine models, the Turing Machine model of computation, theories of computability, resource-
bounded models, and NP-completeness. This course counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite:
COMPSCI 311 with a grade of C or better. It is recommended that students have a B- or better in 311 in order to attempt 501. 3
credits.
COMPSCI 508 Ethical Consideratns/Computing
INSTRUCTOR(S): Michelle Trim
This course considers an array of ethical issues in computing. Readings and class discussions will cover ethical questions related to
artificial intelligence, privacy online, identity in computing, electronic surveillance, environmental responsibility, internet censorship,
network policy, algorithmic systems, information access, ownership of intellectual property in computing contexts and others. All
exampleswillbedrawnfromcurrentandrecenteventswithreadingsfromarangeofsourcesbothjournalisticandacademic.Course
assignments will have real world applications and offer students opportunities for developing their speaking and writing skills. Class
discussions will be a vibrant component of the course. This course counts as an Elective for the CS and INFORM Majors. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 513 Logic in Computer Science
INSTRUCTOR(S): Marius Minea
Rigorous introduction to mathematical logic from an algorithmic perspective. Topics include: Propositional logic: Horn clause
satisfiability and SAT solvers; First Order Logic: soundness and completeness of resolution, compactness theorem. We will use the
CoqtheoremproverandDatalog. ThiscoursecountsasaCSElectivefortheCSMajor. UndergraduatePrerequisite:COMPSCI250
and COMPSCI 311. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 514 Algorithms for Data Science
INSTRUCTOR(S): Cameron Musco
With the advent of social networks, ubiquitous sensors, and large-scale computational science, data scientists must deal with data
that is massive in size, arrives at blinding speeds, and often must be processed within interactive or quasi-interactive time frames.
This course studies the mathematical foundations of big data processing, developing algorithms and learning how to analyze them.
We explore methods for sampling, sketching, and distributed processing of large scale databases, graphs, and data streams for
purposes of scalable statistical description, querying, pattern mining, and learning. This course counts as a CS Elective for the CS
Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite: COMPSCI 240(orSTATISTCS 315/515) andCOMPSCI 311bothwithagradeofB+orbetter, or
(COMPSCI 240 and STATISTCS 315/515 and COMPSCI 311 and MATH 233 and MATH 235, all with a C or better). 3 credits
2026 Spring --- page 7 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 520 Thry & Practice/Software Engin
INSTRUCTOR(S): Heather Conboy
Introduces students to the principal activities and state-of-the-art techniques involved in developing high-quality software systems.
Topics include: 1. AI for software engineering including topics like automated testing, program repair and software verification; 2.
Software engineering for AI like detecting and fixing fairness bugs in AI models; 3. How industry works. This course counts as a CS
Elective for the CS Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite: COMPSCI 320 (or COMPSCI 220 and COMPSCI 326) with a grade of C or
better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 528 Mobile and Ubiquit. Computing
INSTRUCTOR(S): Phuc Nguyen
This course will introduce students to the field of mobile sensing and ubiquitous computing (Ubicomp) – an emerging CS research
area that aims to design and develop disruptive technologies with hardware and software systems for real-world messy, noisy and
mobile scenarios. Thestudents willlearn howtobuildmobile sensing systems, howtoimplement itwithubiquitous computing tools,
how to make sense of the sensor data and model the target variables. Lastly, the students will learn how to critically think about
problems in many application areas including Human-Computer Interaction, Medicine, Sustainability, Transportation, Psychology and
Economics, and subsequently practice to find appropriate Ubicomp solutions. There is no exam in this course. The student is
expected to work on different hands-on assignments, critique writing, and a final project. This course counts as an Elective toward
the CS Major. Open to senior and junior Computer Science majors only Undergraduate Prerequisites: COMPSCI 230 and 240 with a
grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 532 Systems for Data Science
INSTRUCTOR(S): Peter Klemperer
In this course, students will learn the fundamentals behind large-scale systems in the context of data science. We will cover the
issues involved in scaling up (to many processors) and out (to many nodes) parallelism in order to perform fast analyses on large
datasets. These include locality and data representation, concurrency, distributed databases and systems, performance analysis and
understanding. We will explore the details of existing and emerging data science platforms, including MapReduce-Hadoop, Spark,
and more. This course counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite: COMPSCI 377 and COMPSCI 445 both
with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 535 Computer Architecture
INSTRUCTOR(S): Charles Weems
Thestructureofdigitalcomputersisstudiedatseverallevels,fromthebasiclogiclevel,tothecomponentlevel,tothesystemlevel.
Topics include: the design of basic components such as arithmetic units and registers from logic gates; the organization of basic
subsystems such as the memory and I/O subsystems; the interplay between hardware and software in a computer system; the von
Neumann architecture and its performance enhancements such as cache memory, instruction and data pipelines, coprocessors, and
parallelism. Semester team project to design an architecture and develop a software simulation of it. This course counts as a CS
Elective for the CS Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite: COMPSCI 335 with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 546 Applied Information Retrieval
INSTRUCTOR(S): Hamed Zamani
COMPSCI 546 is a graduate level course intended to cover information retrieval and other information processing activities, from an
applied perspective. There will be numerous programming projects and assignments. It provides a richer technical follow on to
COMPSCI 446 (Search Engines) for undergraduates interested in a deeper understanding of the technologies. It also provides a
strong basis for continuing on with COMPSCI 646 (Information Retrieval) for those graduate students who are interested in a more
complete theoretical coverage of the area. Topics will include: search engine construction (document acquisition, processing,
indexing, and querying); learning to rank; information retrieval system performance evaluation; classification and clustering; other
machine learning information processing tasks (e.g. basic deep learning models for information retrieval); and many more. This
course counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite: COMPSCI 320 (or COMPSCI 326) and COMPSCI 383
(or COMPSCI 389 or COMPSCI 446 or COMPSCI 485 or COMPSCI 585) all with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 561 System Defense and Test
INSTRUCTOR(S): Parviz Kermani
This class trains students to detect and analyze weaknesses and vulnerabilities in target systems as a method of assessing the
security of a system. We focus on tools and techniques that an attacker would employ but from the perspective of an ethical system
administrator. Topicsincludetoolsandtechniques forpenetration testingandattacks, information gathering, socialengineering, and
defenses. Specific topics include malware, denial of service attacks, SQL injection, buffer overflow, session hijacking, and system
hacking, network sniffing and scans, wireless encryption weaknesses and other WiFi issues, IDS/firewall evasion, metasploit tools,
physical security, and setting up honeypots. Previously INFOSEC 690S. This course counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major.
Undergraduate Prerequisite: COMPSCI 360 (or COMPSCI 460 or COMPSCI 560 or COMPSCI 660 or E&C-ENG 371) and COMPSCI 453
(or E&C-ENG 325), all with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 8 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 564 Cyber Effects
INSTRUCTOR(S): Nick Merlino, Edward Walters
This course covers a broad range of topics related to cyber security and operations. Our focus is on real world studies of reverse
engineering, exploit analysis, and capability development within the context of computer network operations and attack. The course
has an emphasis on hands-on exercises and projects. Topics covered include computer architecture and assembly language,
principles of embedded security, the essentials of exploit development and analysis (including using industry standard tools such as
Ghidra, and utilizing computer security databases such as CVE), and discussion of real-world events and techniques. This course
counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite: COMPSCI 230 (or E&C-ENG 322) and COMPSCI 360
(previously COMPSCI 460 or COMPSCI 365 or COMPSCI 390R or COMPSCI 466 or E&C-ENG 371), all with a grade of C or better. 3
credits.
COMPSCI 589 Machine Learning
INSTRUCTOR(S): Bruno Castro da Silva
This course will introduce core machine learning models and algorithms for classification, regression, clustering, and dimensionality
reduction. On the theory side, the course will focus on effectively using machine learning methods to solve real-world problems with
an emphasis on model selection, regularization, and empirical evaluation. The assignments will involve both mathematical problems
and implementation tasks. The course will assume experience with the Python programming language. While this course has an
applied focus, it still requires strong mathematical background in probability and statistics, calculus, and linear algebra. Graduate
students should check the descriptions of the undergraduate prerequisite courses to verify that they have sufficient mathematical
background for 589. Graduate students from outside computer science with sufficient background are also welcome to take the
course. This course counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite: MATH 545 and COMPSCI 240 and
STATISTC315/515 allwithagradeofCorbetter.(MATH545canbeskippedbystudents whohavetakenMATH235andMATH233
both with B+ or better. STATISTC 315/515 can be skipped by students who have taken COMPSCI 240 with a B+ or better). 3
credits.
COMPSCI 590AB Quantum Cryptography
INSTRUCTOR(S): Filip Rozpedek
The ability to transmit quantum information over long distances will enable implementation of many fascinating quantum
communication tasks and provide us with novel capabilities that reach beyond what we can do over classical Internet alone.
Examples of such tasks include blind quantum computing, clock synchronization or distributed quantum computing. Quantum
cryptography is one family of such tasks with the most famous one being quantum key distribution. This task, which is currently the
mostmaturequantumtechnology,enablesdistributionofsharedkeysthroughaprotocolthatisinformation-theoreticallysecureand
whose security remarkably is guaranteed by the laws of quantum physics. Such unconditional security cannot be achieved in the
classical world. In this course we will introduce the world of quantum cryptographic protocols and describe how the power of
quantum mechanics can enable distribution of shared secret keys even with untrusted devices. It will also introduce many other
fascinatingquantumprotocolsbeyondquantumkeydistribution.Thecoursewillmeetjointlywiththecourse690BBwhichcoversthe
same material. Unlike 690BB this course does not include a project as one of the assessment components and it puts more grade
weight on the homework. Students who take this course cannot simultaneously, nor later, enroll in 690BB. This course counts as a
CS Elective for the CS Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite: COMPSCI 412/490Q (OR COMPSCI 590Q OR COMPSCI 590QC OR E&C-
ENG 550 OR PHYSICS 537) with a grade of C or better. 3 credits
COMPSCI 590AE Mobile and Wireless Networks
INSTRUCTOR(S): James Kurose
This course covers wireless networking and mobility principles and practice. The focus of "practice" is primarily 802.11 (WiFi) and
4G/5G cellular networks. Unlike many other wireless networking courses, this course focuses primarily on the networking and
systems aspects of wireless and mobile networks, rather than on the wireless channel aspects. This course counts as a CS Elective
for the CS Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite: COMPSCI 453 or E&C-ENG 374 with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 590QC Quantum Communication
INSTRUCTOR(S): Gayane Vardoyan
This course will provide an introduction to fundamental principles underlying quantum communication, including quantum repeaters,
entanglement, and other tools needed for the implementation of distributed quantum protocols. Topics include: basics of quantum
computation and information; modeling and coping with noise in quantum systems; entanglement generation schemes; quantum
Internet and its applications. This course counts as a CS Elective for the CS Major. Undergraduate Prerequisite: MATH 235 and
COMPSCI 240 (or STATISTC 315/515), both with a grade of C or better. 3 credits
2026 Spring --- page 9 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 590RM
INSTRUCTOR(S): David Jensen
This course introduces concepts, practices, and tools for conducting effective research. You will learn how to read technical papers,
interpretpublishedresearch,assesstheresearchfrontier,selectresearchtopics,deviseresearchquestionsandhypotheses,propose
and plan research activities, analyze experimental results, and report those results. The course is structured around four activities:
(1) Synchronous and asynchronous lectures on basic research strategies and techniques; (2) Synchronous activities that apply
course concepts; (3) Reading and discussions of technical papers in computer science; and (4) An individual semester-long project
that replicates an existing published study in computer science. The course requires significant reading, reviewing, and writing.
Studentsareexpectedtoparticipateactivelyinclassactivities.ThecourseisintendedforMSandadvancedundergraduatestudents.
It provides a grounding in research methods that will aid your entry into research-oriented industrial positions and PhD studies. For
undergraduates considering graduate studies, this course will help inform and accelerate that direction. For undergraduates, this
coursecanbeusedtosatisfythe499YrequirementforDepartmentalandMultidisciplinary Honorsstudentswhosethesesorprojects
have a substantial empirical component. Undergraduates must obtain approval of the Computer Science Honors Program Director
prior to registering. Does not count as a CS elective for the CS major (BA or BS). 3 credits.
COMPSCI 602 Research Methods/Empirical CS
INSTRUCTOR(S): David Jensen
This course introduces concepts, practices, and tools for conducting effective research. You will learn how to read technical papers,
interpretpublishedresearch,assesstheresearchfrontier,selectresearchtopics,deviseresearchquestionsandhypotheses,propose
and plan research activities, analyze experimental results, and report those results. The course is structured around five activities:
(1) Synchronous and asynchronous lectures on basic research strategies and techniques; (2) Synchronous activities that apply
course concepts; (3) Reading and discussions of technical papers in computer science; (4) An individual semester-long empirical
research project; and (5) Review and feedback on other student's projects. The course requires significant reading, reviewing, and
writing. Students are expected to participate actively in class activities and to provide meaningful comments on the work of other
students. For PhD students, this course will help accelerate your current and future research. For MS students, this course will
provide a grounding in research methods that will aid your entry into research-oriented industrial positions and PhD studies. For
undergraduates considering graduate studies, this course will help inform and accelerate that direction. For undergraduates, this
coursecanbeusedtosatisfythe499YrequirementforDepartmentalandMultidisciplinary Honorsstudentswhosethesesorprojects
have a substantial empirical component. Undergraduates must obtain approval of the Computer Science Honors Program Director
prior to registering. Open to graduate Computer Science students only. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 603 Robotics
INSTRUCTOR(S): Hao Zhang
This course is intended to serve as an advanced overview of robotics spanning the complete autonomy loop: perception, planning,
and control. We will study the theory, algorithms, and efficient implementations related to these topics, with focus on open
discussions for how to do research to go beyond the state of the art. Students will gain hands-on experience in implementing, and
extending such algorithms using simulations. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 611 Advanced Algorithms
INSTRUCTOR(S): Hung Le
Principles underlying the design and analysis of efficient algorithms. Topics to be covered include: divide-and-conquer algorithms,
graph algorithms, matroids and greedy algorithms, randomized algorithms, NP-completeness, approximation algorithms, linear
programming. Open to graduate Computer Science students only. Prerequisite: The mathematical maturity expected of incoming
Computer Science graduate students, knowledge of algorithms at the level of COMPSCI 311. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 613 Adv Logic in Computer Science
INSTRUCTOR(S): Marius Minea
Rigorous introduction to mathematical logic from an algorithmic perspective. Topics include: Propositional logic: Horn clause
satisfiability and SAT solvers; First Order Logic: soundness and completeness of resolution, compactness theorem, automatic
theorem proving, model checking. We will learn about and use the Coq theorem prover, Datalog, a Model Checker, and SAT and
SMT solvers. Prerequisites: Students taking this course should have undergraduate preparation in discrete math and algorithms.
Requirements will include readings, class participation, weekly problem sets, a midterm and a final project. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 614 RandomizedAlgorithms/App to DS
INSTRUCTOR(S): Andrew McGregor
Randomness has proven itself to be a useful resource for developing provably efficient algorithms and protocols for large scale data
processing. As a result, the study of randomized algorithms has become a major research topic in recent years. This course will
explore a collection of techniques for effectively using randomization and for analyzing randomized algorithms, as well as examples
from a variety of settings and problem areas. The course is a natural follow on both COMPSCI 514: Algorithms for Data Science and
COMPSCI 611: Advanced Algorithms. 3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 10 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 620 AdvSoftwareEng:Synth&Develpmnt
INSTRUCTOR(S): Madeline Endres
This course examines the varied approaches and human factors that influence software development. We investigate various ideas
about how software products can be structured and function. Topics include, but are not limited to, software development
productivity, requirements elicitation, software development process, program comprehension, software development team
structure, and emerging software development paradigms. Students will engage with both established best practices and the latest
research through a series of readings, in-class presentations, and a final project as part of their coursework. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 625 Advanced Methods in HCI
INSTRUCTOR(S): Narges Mahyar
This is an advanced course in HCI. This course will provide a deeper treatment of some topics that are typically found in an
undergraduateHCIcourse.Forexample,designmethodologies,evaluationmethodologies(bothquantitativeandqualitative),human
information processing, cognition, and perception. This course will also introduce students to research frontiers in HCI. The course
will cover topics of Universal Usability, CSCW, Digital Civics and fundamentals of designing interactive technology for people. 3
credits.
COMPSCI 627 Fixing Social Media
INSTRUCTOR(S): Ethan Zuckerman
Over the past decade, user-generated participatory media – social media – has emerged as the dominant model for content of the
Internet. From Facebook to Twitter, YouTube to Wikipedia, content created by non-professionals and circulated for commercial and
non-commercial motives underpins seven of the top10 websites inthe US, and has become an increasingly important component of
the news ecosystem. While social media was initially hailed as a powerful tool for broadening civic participation, many problems
have emerged with the rise of the medium, from questions of whether social media usage is bad for our individual mental health, to
whether the fabric of our democracy is being damaged by disinformation, fragmentation and hyperpolarization. As legislators look to
regulate these platforms and commentators propose shutting them down entirely, this course looks for an alternative: affirmative
visionsofsocialmediathataregoodforindividualsandsociety,whichwecouldworktowardsbuilding. Thisclassexaminespossible
problems with existing modes of social media, discusses ways in which social media could be a benefit to individuals and societies,
develops case studies of successful and healthy online communities, and ultimately designs and builds tools to improve existing
social media systems or replace them with novel models. Students will write reflectively about weekly readings and discussions and
participate in multi-week projects, ultimately building teams to work on final projects. Meets with COMM 627 and SPP 627. 3
credits.
COMPSCI 645 DatabaseDesign&Implementation
INSTRUCTOR(S): Marco Serafini
This course covers the design and implementation of traditional relational database systems as well as advanced data management
systems. The course will treat fundamental principles of databases such as the relational model, conceptual design, and schema
refinement. We will also cover core database implementation issues including storage and indexing, query processing and
optimization, and transaction management. Additionally, we will address challenges in modern information systems, including
scalability and parallelization, big data systems, cloud databases, dealing with graph and vector data, and the integration of
database management systems and machine learning. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 651 Optimization/Computer Science
INSTRUCTOR(S): Madalina Fiterau Brostean
Much recent work in computer science in a variety of areas, from game theory to machine learning and sensor networks, exploits
sophisticated methods of optimization. This course is intended to give students an in-depth background in both the foundations as
well as some recent trends in the theory and practice of optimization for computer science. The Optimization course covers these
topics, which are critical to a large number of research projects conducted within the department. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 677 Distributed&Operating Systems
INSTRUCTOR(S): Peter Klemperer
This course provides an in-depth examination of the principles of distributed systems and advanced concepts in operating systems.
Covered topics include client-server programming, distributed scheduling, virtualization, cloud computing, distributed storage,
security in distributed systems, distributed middleware, ubiquitous computing, and applications such as the Internet of Things, Web
and peer-to-peer systems. Prerequisites: Students should be able to easily program in a high-level language such as Java, C++ or
Python,havehadacourseondatastructures,befamiliarwithelementsofcomputerarchitectureandhavehadpreviousexposureto
the operating system concepts of processes, virtual memory, and scheduling. A previous course on uniprocessor operating systems
(e.g., COMPSCI 377) will be helpful but not required. 3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 11 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 682 Neural Networks: Modern Intro
INSTRUCTOR(S): Subhransu Maji
This course will focus on modern, practical methods for deep learning with neural networks. The course will begin with a description
of simple classifiers such as perceptrons and logistic regression classifiers, and move on to standard neural networks, convolutional
neural networks, some elements of recurrent neural networks, and transformers. The emphasis will be on understanding the basics
and on practical application more than on theory. Many applications will be in computer vision, but we will make an effort to cover
some natural language processing (NLP) applications as well.The current plan is to use Python and associated packages such as
Numpy and Pytorch. Required background includes Linear Algebra, Probability and Statistics, and Multivariate Calculus. All
assignments will be in the Python programming language. Open to graduate Computer Science students only. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 683 Artificial Intelligence
INSTRUCTOR(S): Yair Zick
In-depth introduction to Artificial Intelligence focusing on techniques that allow intelligent systems to reason effectively with
uncertain information and cope limited computational resources. Topics include: problem-solving using search, heuristic search
techniques, constraint satisfaction, local search, abstraction and hierarchical search, resource-bounded search techniques, principles
of knowledge representation and reasoning, logical inference, reasoning under uncertainty, belief networks, decision theoretic
reasoning, representing and reasoning about preferences, planning under uncertainty using Markov decision processes, multi-agent
systems, and computational models of bounded rationality. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 688 Probabilistic Graphical Models
INSTRUCTOR(S): Benjamin Marlin
Probabilisticgraphicalmodelsprovideanintuitivelanguagefordescribingthestructureofjointprobabilitydistributionsusinggraphs.
They enable the compact representation and manipulation of exponentially large probability distributions, which allows them to
efficiently manage the uncertainty and partial observability common in real-world problems. As a result, graphical models have
become invaluable tools in a wide range of areas from computer vision and sensor networks to natural language processing and
computational biology. The aim of this course is to develop the knowledge and skills necessary to effectively design, implement and
apply these models to solve real problems. The course will cover (a) Bayesian and Markov networks; (b) exact and approximate
inference methods; (c) estimation of the parameters and structure of graphical models; (d) broader topics in probabilistic inference
for statistics and machine learning. Students entering the class should have good programming skills and knowledge of algorithms.
Undergraduate-level knowledge of probability and statistics and a prior machine learning course are recommended. Open to
graduate Computer Science students only. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 690AB Systems for Deep Learning
INSTRUCTOR(S): Shiqing Ma
This course is designed to provide a comprehensive understanding of computer systems architecture that supports deep learning
workloads. It assumes students have prior knowledge on computer systems, algorithms, and Python/C/C++ programming
background. In the course, we will study the full-stack system design to support deep learning, covering topics from the high-level
programming frameworks to low-level kernel implementations. We will also introduce cutting-edge research on efficient and scalable
deep learning model training, inference, and serving. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 690AG Algorithmic Game Theory
INSTRUCTOR(S): Hedyeh Beyhaghi
Thiscourseoffersagraduate-levelintroductiontotopicsattheinterfaceoftheoreticalcomputerscienceandeconomics,withafocus
on strategic and learning-based interactions. We will cover the basics of mechanism design, auctions, and pricing, as well as models
of strategic behavior such as Nash equilibrium and the price of anarchy. Additional topics include learning in games, strategic
classification,anddynamicsinmulti-agentsystems. WhileCOMPSCI515focusesoncooperation,socialchoice,andfairdivision,this
course emphasizes competitive settings and mechanism design. Students interested in both perspectives are encouraged to take
both courses, which are designed to be complementary; however, prior completion of COMPSCI 515 is not required. 3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 12 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 690BB Quantum Cryptography
INSTRUCTOR(S): Filip Rozpedek
The ability to transmit quantum information over long distances will enable implementation of many fascinating quantum
communication tasks and provide us with novel capabilities that reach beyond what we can do over classical Internet alone.
Examples of such tasks include blind quantum computing, clock synchronization or distributed quantum computing. Quantum
cryptography is one family of such tasks with the most famous one being quantum key distribution. This task, which is currently the
mostmaturequantumtechnology,enablesdistributionofsharedkeysthroughaprotocolthatisinformation-theoreticallysecureand
whose security remarkably is guaranteed by the laws of quantum physics. Such unconditional security cannot be achieved in the
classical world. In this course we will introduce the world of quantum cryptographic protocols and describe how the power of
quantum mechanics can enable distribution of shared secret keys even with untrusted devices. It will also introduce many other
fascinatingquantumprotocolsbeyondquantumkeydistribution.Thecoursewillmeetjointlywiththecourse590ABwhichcoversthe
same material. Unlike 590AB this course includes a project as one of the assessment components and it puts less grade weight on
the homework. Students who take this course cannot simultaneously, nor later, enroll in 590AB. This course requires previous
knowledge of the basics of quantum information. Students enrolling in this course need to be familiar with the following concepts
covered in COMPSCI 412 (Quantum Information Science) and COMPSCI 590Q/648 (Quantum Information Systems) and
corresponding mathematical formalism: 1) Pure states of quantum systems and qubits in particular 2) Projective measurements in
a basis 3) Unitary transformations 4) Bloch sphere representation of a qubit 5) Basics of the density matrix formalism. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 690G Security/Large-Scale Systems
INSTRUCTOR(S): Pubali Datta
This course provides an in-depth examination of the issues in system security, and assumes prior knowledge of operating system
concepts. We will start with learning the classic approaches to security attacks and defenses from the perspective of a single host
system. Topics include access control, information flow control, system auditing, privilege separation, security policies, host-based
intrusion detection etc. Then we will study how these classic mechanisms are expanded and adapted to modern distributed system
platforms such as cloud platforms, Internet of Things platforms, and large enterprises. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 690QC Quantum Communication
INSTRUCTOR(S): Gayane Vardoyan
This course will provide an introduction to fundamental principles underlying quantum communication, including quantum repeaters,
entanglement, and other tools needed for the implementation of distributed quantum protocols. Topics include: basics of quantum
computation and information; modeling and coping with noise in quantum systems; entanglement generation schemes; quantum
Internet and its applications. 3 credits
COMPSCI 690R Computing/DigiBiomarkersinHC
INSTRUCTOR(S): Sunghoon Lee
Computer science has played a pivotal role in developing innovative technologies to monitor patients' health conditions beyond the
traditional laboratory or clinical environments. The development of clinically valid digital biomarkers can enable a wide range of
applications, including the implementation of targeted behavioral interventions to drive substantial improvements in health-related
outcomes, monitoring the progress of individuals undergoing interventions, and assessing the efficacy of emerging therapeutic
interventions. In this course, we will delve into the application of machine learning and mobile technologies in the development of
digital biomarkers. Focusing on its application in the analysis of human movements, behaviors, and behavioral phenotypes, the
course curriculum will encompass the fundamentals of human movement analysis, mobile and wearable sensing technologies to
support remote human movement monitoring, fundamentals of signal processing techniques, and state-of-the-art machine learning
techniques. Additionally, the course examines the theoretical foundations and practical applications of biomedical measurement
sciences, and how they integrate with modern machine learning research to develop reliable, responsive, and clinically valid digital
biomarkers for movement-related health and wellness. This course contains lectures, assignments, a final project, paper
presentations, and critical discussions. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 690S AI Alignment
INSTRUCTOR(S): Scott Niekum
This course will focus on modern machine learning approaches to learn from human demonstrations, preferences, feedback, and
other multimodal signals, with the goal of aligning agent goals and behaviors with human values and desires. For the purposes of
both safety and practicality, it is increasingly important for AI systems to be well-aligned with human users as their capabilities
improve and they are deployed more frequently in real-world settings. This course will provide the basic tools to address these
important issues, covering topics such as behavioral cloning, inverse reinforcement learning, preference elicitation, active learning,
learning from feedback, value alignment, bounded rationality, and best practices for human studies. We will examine applications
including robotics, large language models, and self-driving cars. 3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 13 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 690U Computational Bio & Bioinform
INSTRUCTOR(S): Anna Green
This course is designed to provide computer scientists with a comprehensive introduction to the field of computational biology. The
course will cover the application of computational techniques to modern research challenges in biology, discussing both foundational
algorithms and newly introduced methods. The necessary background on biology will be provided in order to contextualize the
methods. The primary focus will be analysis of genomic data, including variant calling, genome annotation, sequence search,
sequence alignment, phylogeny construction, mutation effect prediction, population genetics, and genotype-phenotype association
studies.Wewillalsocoverproteinstructureanalysisandprediction.Throughoutthecourse,wewillemphasizetheuniquechallenges
toworkingwithbiologicaldata.Throughlecturesandhands-onprogrammingproblemsets,studentswilldevelopthenecessaryskills
to tackle computational challenges in the field of biology. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 691O S-Tools/Explanatory&TutorSystm
INSTRUCTOR(S): Beverly Woolf
ArtificialIntelligencewillradicallychangeeducation.Throughmachinelearning,datamining,analytics,robotics,andusermodels,AI
will replace false learning boundaries (e.g., learning places, time, level of study); personalize learning; make learning instantly
available to everyone; connect learners with partners; provide multi-media; and augment human learning ability. This seminar
examines recent work in explanatory and tutoring systems, presents theories about digital teaching and learning, and describes how
todeliverpersonalized teaching inonlinesystems. Suchsoftware supports peopleworkingaloneorincollaborative inquirytorapidly
access and integrate global information. This course describes how to build tutors, stimulates awareness of research issues, and
promotes sound analytic and design skills. Specific topics include systems that support collaboration, inquiry, natural language
dialogue, authoring tools and user models. The course is appropriate for students from many disciplines (e.g., computer science,
linguistics,education,andpsychology),researchers,andpractitionersfromacademia,industry,andgovernment.Noprogrammingis
required. Students will read and critique papers about AI tools (e.g., vision, natural language), methods, and will study the
complexity of human learning through advances in cognitive science. Weekly assignments invite students to critique the literature
andafinal project requires adetailed specification (notaprogram) for atutor onyour chosen topic. Students present readings from
the research literature and several working systems will be available for hands-on or virtual critique. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 692CT S-Category Theory for AGI
INSTRUCTOR(S): Sridhar Mahadevan
The world’s largest AI companies are collectively spending several trillion dollars in the most expensive race in human history to
build AGI systems. What is AGI and how close are we to achieving it? This course will introduce students to the use of the latest
advances in pure mathematics from the 21st century, such as Markov symmetric monoidal categories in causality, probability and
statistics, to analyze the current AGI systems, and hopefully develop the next-generation of more sophisticated AGI systems. It will
teach students the core concepts — categories and functors, universal representations and Yoneda Lemma, limits and colimits,
adjoint functors, monads and categorical probability, Kan extensions — as well as applications of these abstract concepts in
generative AI and AGI systems, machine learning approaches such as clustering and dimensionality reduction, causal reasoning and
probabilistic inference, modeling RL over universal coalgebras, relational knowledge representation using categories, and designing
safe AI systems using topos theory. The theoretical ideas will be fully co-developed with hands-on experience in programming
categorical methodsonthecurrent AGIsystems, suchasGPT5,Claude,Geminietc.Studentswillonlyberequiredtohaveaccess to
the free versions of these chatbots. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 692EF S-Embedded Models/IoT & Health
INSTRUCTOR(S): Deepak Ganesan, Phuc Nguyen
The deployment of foundation models in resource-constrained mobile and wearable devices presents unique challenges and
opportunities, particularly in health and wearable sensing applications. This advanced seminar explores the cutting-edge intersection
of large AI models, embedded systems, and digital health, with a focus on real-world applications in wearable and mobile biosignal
sensing platforms. The course examines two primary themes: (1) the application of foundation models in multimodal biosignal
sensing contexts, including real-time physiological monitoring, neural signal processing, behavioral understanding, and clinical
decision support through wearable devices such as EEG headsets, smartwatches, smart rings, eyewear, and earables; and (2) the
technical challenges and solutions for deploying these powerful models on resource-constrained devices, including model
compression, efficient inference, on-device learning, and real-time processing requirements. Example topics will include: Application
Domains in Health and Wearables, Systems Optimizations and Architecture, IoT Applications and Environments. The course will
primarily consist of paper readings, presentations, and discussions. Students will critically examine recent advances in the field
through both academic papers and industry developments. For 3-credit option, a semester-long research project is required,
involving either the development of a novel application using foundation models on wearable platforms or the implementation of
optimization techniques for embedded deployment. 1-3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 14 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 692G S-Simulation & Casual Modeling
INSTRUCTOR(S): Peter Haas, David Jensen
This seminar will explore the relationships between simulation modeling and causal modeling, focusing on the potential of these two
researchfieldstoenricheachother.Fromasimulationpointofview,causalmodelscouldprovidemethodsforenablingnewkindsof
tractable probabilistic reasoning about models, for learning models directly from data, and for learning high-level abstractions of a
detailed mechanistic model. From a causal-modeling viewpoint, simulation modeling could provide a means to enhance the
expressiveness of languages for high-level statistical models with finer-grained mechanistic and generative semantics. Topics will
include simulation, causal learning and reasoning, model-based RL, simulation metamodeling, probabilistic programming, process
mining, and discovery of causal mechanisms. 1-3 credits.
COMPSCI 692L S-Natural Language Processing
INSTRUCTOR(S): Brendan O'Connor
Weekly seminar requiring students to read an NLP paper and discuss and review it from a variety of perspectives. Some weeks will
feature invited speakers instead of paper reviews. 1 credit.
COMPSCI 692QA S-Quantum & Artificial Intel
INSTRUCTOR(S): Justin Domke, Stefan Krastanov
The seminar will focus on rigorous results on complexity and learnability of modeling physical processes, and applications of
quantum information science to understanding of AI and vice versa. 1 credit.
COMPSCI 692QB S-Quantum Networking
INSTRUCTOR(S): Stav Haldar, Filip Rozpedek
This seminar will cover topics in quantum networks and will be based on invited talks given by invited speakers supplemented by a
few discussion sessions. Possible topics include quantum network architectures, quantum repeater design, techniques for
overcoming noise in a network including entanglement distillation and quantum error correction, resource allocation in quantum
networks, various quantum network applications as well as performance modeling and analysis of quantum networks. Specific topics
covered will depend on the expertise of the invited speakers. The first objective of this seminar is to bring researchers in quantum
information up to speed regarding the state of the art in quantum networks. The second objective is to identify MS and PhD level
researchproblemsinquantumnetworks.TheseminarwillbedoneincollaborationwiththeNSFCenterforQuantumNetworks. May
be taken repeated for credit up to three times. 1 credit.
COMPSCI 701 Advanced Topics Computer Sci
INSTRUCTOR(S):
Advanced Topics in Computer Science Master's Project: Advanced research project in Computer Science.
The 3 credit option is for the second semester of a two semester sequence, 701 followed by 701Y.
The 6 credit option is for a project that will be completed over two semesters with enrollment in only one semester.
COMPSCI 701Y Advanced Topics Computer Sci
INSTRUCTOR(S):
Advanced Topics in Computer Science Master's Project: Advanced research project in Computer Science.
Indicates the first semester of a two-semester sequence, 701Y (3 credits) followed by 701 (3 credits), with grade for both assigned
at the end. 3 credits.
COMPSCI 791U S-Adv Topics in Info Retrieval
INSTRUCTOR(S): Razieh Rahimi, Hamed Zamani
A seminar in which students will read, present, and discuss research papers on recent and advanced topics in Information Retrieval
(IR). Students are expected to read papers for every session. For one or more sessions in the semester, students are expected to
make summary presentations and lead discussion of the papers. Students should have taken COMPSCI 646, Information Retrieval,
or a comparable course. This semester, the seminar will primarily cover the following main topics: Retrieval-Enhanced Machine
Learning,LargeLanguageModelsforIR,ReasoningforInformationRetrieval,andAgenticInformationRetrieval.Alongwithstudying
researchpapersontheaforementioned topics,studentsregisteredforthreecredithoursshouldworkwiththeinstructortocomplete
amutually agreed-upon research project. This seminar assumes prior knowledge offundamental information retrieval concepts. 1or
3 credits.
COMPSCI 879 TeachngAssist/TomorrowsFaculty
INSTRUCTOR(S): Neena Thota
Teaching Assistants as Tomorrow's Faculty prepares Teaching Assistants (TAs) at the College of Information and Computer Sciences
to fulfill their duties in an effective and pedagogically sound manner. The two credit (not repeatable) course is semester long and
taken by all TAs prior to assuming assistantship. 2 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 15 --- 1/15/2026

COMPSCI 891M S-Theory of Computation
INSTRUCTOR(S): Cameron Musco
Thetheory seminar isaweekly meeting inwhich topics ofinterest inthetheory ofcomputation -broadly construed -arepresented.
This is sometimes new research by visitors or local people. It is sometimes work in progress, and it is sometimes recent material of
others that some of us present in order to learn and share. This seminar may be taken repeatedly for credit up to six times. 1
credit.
COMPSCI H230 Comp Syst Principles colloq
INSTRUCTOR(S): Meng-Chieh Chiu
Students will explore topics from the 230 curriculum in greater detail, focusing on low-level systems concepts, memory and process
management, and concurrency. The course emphasizes deeper understanding of how systems behave at the machine level through
additional reading, discussion, and implementation. Students will also gain hands-on experience with an alternative systems
programming language (e.g., Rust), enabling them to compare design choices and safety models across system languages. 1 credit.
COMPSCI H311 Intro to Algorithms (colloq)
INSTRUCTOR(S): Ghazaleh Parvini
The design and analysis of efficient algorithms for important computational problems. Emphasis on the relationships between
algorithms and data structures and on measures of algorithmic efficiency. Advanced graph algorithms, dynamic programming
applications,NP-completenessandspacecomplexity,approximationandrandomizedalgorithms.Experimentalanalysisofalgorithms
also emphasized. Use of computer required. Prerequisite: CICS 210 (or COMPSCI 187) and COMPSCI 250 (or MATH 455) all with a
grade of C or better (or COMPSCI 311 with a grade of B or better). 1 credit.
COMPSCI H466 Applied Cryptography colloq
INSTRUCTOR(S): Adam O'Neill
This colloquium will guide students in an in-depth study of both theoretical and practical cryptographic principles. Topics include
zero-knowledge proofs, derivatives of which are now used in anonymous cryptocurrency such as ZCash, secure messaging protocols
(e.g. Signal, Whatsapp), and secure multiparty computation. Other topics at student request. Prerequisite: COMPSCI 311 with a
grade of C or better (or COMPSCI 466 with a grade of B or better). 1 credit.
COMPSCI H589 Machine Learning (colloq)
INSTRUCTOR(S): Bruno Castro da Silva
This colloquium will enrich the primary course by focusing on reading, presenting, and discussing foundational and recent research
papers from the machine learning literature. Students will write weekly reading responses, and lead one to two group discussions
over the course of the semester. Prerequisite: Students must be enrolled in or have completed COMPSCI 589. 1 credit.
INFO 101 Introduction to Informatics
INSTRUCTOR(S): Michelle Trim
An introduction to the main concepts of Informatics. There are several 'Big Ideas' in computing, including but not limited to
abstraction, data and information, algorithms, programming, the internet, and the global impacts of computing. This class provides
an introduction to those ideas and considers some of the ways that those computing principles might be used to solve real world
problems. Computer-based assignments are an integral part of this course but no programming knowledge or prior programming
experience is expected or required. Open to undergraduate students NOT majoring in Computer Science. 3 credits.
INFO 150 Mathmtcl Fndtn for Informatics
INSTRUCTOR(S): Peter Haas
Mathematical techniques useful in the study of computing and information processing. The mathematical method of definition and
proof. Sets, functions, and relations. Combinatorics, probability and probabilistic reasoning. Graphs and trees as models of data
and of computational processes. Prerequisite: R1 math skills recommended. Not intended for Computer Science majors – students
interested in a majors-level treatment of this material should see COMPSCI 240 and 250 (or MATH 455). 3 credits.
INFO 203 A Networked World
INSTRUCTOR(S): Mohammadhassan Hajiesmaili
The course will cover the technical foundations of today’s communication networks, particularly the Internet. It will also address key
social, policy, economic and legal aspects of these networks, their use (and abuse), and their regulation. This course covers
computer science topics, but all material will be presented in a way that is accessible to an educated audience with or without a
strongtechnicalbackground. NotintendedforComputerSciencemajors–studentsinterestedinaCSmajors-leveltreatmentofthis
material should see COMPSCI 453. 3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 16 --- 1/15/2026

INFO 248 Intro to Data Science
INSTRUCTOR(S): Gordon Anderson
Thiscourseisanintroductiontotheconceptsandskillsinvolvedwiththecollection,management,analysis,andpresentationofdata
sets and the data products that result from the work of data scientists. Privacy, algorithmic bias and ethical issues are also
discussed. Students will work with data from the financial, epidemiological, educational, and other domains. The course provides
examples of real-world data that students work with using various software tools. This course consists of two lecture meetings and
one lab meeting per week. Readings will be assigned as preparation for each class meeting. A semester project will be assigned.
Students work in pairs to develop their project over the semester. The project provides students with an opportunity to work
collaboratively to explore the topics in more depth in a specialized domain. A midterm and final exam will be given. Grades are
determined by a combination of scores on lab activities, projects, and exam scores. Software: all software is freely available. Open
to INFORM majors. Prerequisite: a grade of C or or above in the following courses: CICS 110 (or CICS 160 or COMPSCI 119 or
COMPSCI 121) with a grade of C or above and either: PSYCH 240, OIM 240, STATISTC 240, RES-ECON 212, SOCIOL 212, OR
STATISTC 315/515, OR COMPSCI 240, with a grade of C or above. 4 credits.
INFO 348 Data Analytics with Python
INSTRUCTOR(S): Matthew Rattigan
The modern world is awash with data, and making sense of it requires specialized skills. This course will expose students to
commonly used data analytics techniques. Topics include the acquisition, manipulation, and transformation of structured data,
exploratory data analysis, data visualization, and predictive modeling. Students in this course will learn and use the Python
programming language and tools for working with data. Analysis will be performed using real data sets. Does not count as a CS
Elective (BA or BS). Satisfies one of the Data Science Concentration requirements and counts as an elective for the Health and Life
Sciences Concentration for the Informatics major. Open to INFORM majors. Prerequisite: INFO 248 and CICS 160 (or INFO 190T or
COMPSCI 186 or 187), both with a grade of C or better. 3 credits.
2026 Spring --- page 17 --- 1/15/2026